---
permalink: /teaching/
title: "Teaching Philosophy"
modified: 30 July 2022
---

I had my first academic teaching and mentoring experiences as a senior graduate student in the third year of my PhD. Since I was heavily involved in cancer prog- nostic studies, I instructed new research scholars and graduate students with the fundamentals of cancer epidemiology. Already at that point I figured out three teaching and mentoring principles that I always like to pass on to mentees and students.

# Hands-on

I would describe myself as an autodidact as I have always enjoyed to figure out things on my own and apply them hands-on. Admittedly, an autodidact learning rate can be significantly slower than more systematic learning approaches as hierarchical principles may not be pre-structured. Nevertheless, it taught me that concepts can be learned more deeply and sustainably by discovering them hands- on. For example, I recently gave an introductory lecture Pharmacoepidemiology 101 for master’s students in medical biometry/biostatistics who are strongly trained in the analysis of randomized trials but were mostly not aware of biases inherited in non-randomized data. The way I approached the abstract world of biases in phar- macoepidemiology was to present studies in which one of the biases led to a wrong conclusion of the study. Instead of pre-instructing them on these biases, they had to figure out potential problems there may have been with the study design or anal- ysis in a team-based way. It was thrilling to see how much both the students and I learned from each other and how quickly they adopted and applied the learned concepts in a following exercise lecture. This is why I think a hands-on approach leads to a more sustainable learning success.

# Passion

When instructing and supervising students, one of my major aims is to create passion for the subject of matter. When interviewing candidates for new positions, one thing that I always ask is which topic they would like to do research on if they had a choice. I made the experience that not many applicants have an answer to that, who otherwise demonstrated an excellent skillset for the positions they applied for. I see it as my mission to guide students and lead them to their field of interest that they feel most passionate for. This creates a situation where students are most excited and productive about their work and research. It also helps them to set a basis for their future professional life. For example, when I discuss with gradu- ate students about their next strategical step in their projects, instead of providing them my opinion, I first ask them to tell me what they think would be the best next step. This provides them the neccessary maturity and responsibility to con- fidently conduct their own research and establish their profiles in the scientific world.

# Curiosity

Finally, I always encourage students to be curious and try to expand their knowledge and understanding beyond their own scientific branch. It is crit- ical to advocate from early on that science is international and interdisciplinary. Particularly in the field of health sciences, the joint work of many professions is nec- essary to make a difference for the patient. The pharmaceutical profession comes in many nuances from being a hospital pharmacist who sees patients and consults physicians to the pharmacist in basic research who analyzes genomic data to de- velop new and innovative drugs. Especially for undergraduate students it is very important to make them aware of the possibilities there are. I realized this on my own as I would not have discovered the field of pharmacoepidemiology without be- ing curious and expanding my horizon. This also why I chose to do a postdoctoral fellowship in a data scientific environment mainly working with computer scientists and bioinformaticians on machine learning problems. I have often realized that we speak two different languages for the exact same thing and that it is possible to learn a lot from each other. Another aspect of being curious is the critical appraisal of findings that one may take for granted. I started my PhD asking the question if β-blockers may be used as chemopreventive drug leading to a better prognosis for cancer patients. By systematically summarizing and meta-analyzing pertinent studies, it turned out that a common methodological pitfall in the design of epi- demiological studies (immortal time bias) was the major driver among those studies to arrive at this conclusion. This is a striking example for my motivation to teach and instruct students to always make informed decisions based on the best current evidence.